---
layout: post
title: "IMAPvNEW"
date: 2005-10-14
author: Chris
categories: [Miscellaneous]
---
Here at CentreSource, we use IMAP for most of our mail access. It's served via courier-imap and stored in Maildir directories. While this configuration is about as good as it gets for e-mail, the limitations of IMAP in particular have become very clear and frustrating. Naturally, the fact that Outlook just .. does not work well with IMAP is a big problem, but beyond that, IMAP is just not a protocol that has withstood the test of time. There's a litany of minor complaints with IMAP's problems, but there are larger problems. There are things that IMAP just simply can't do.

It's time for a mail retrieval protocol and server for the 21st century. Here are some of the features I would imagine that such a beast would encompass, along with the explanation:

Server-side Indexing
    One big limitation of keeping the bulk of mail on your server and accessing it via IMAP is that searching it is very slow. I currently get around this by using [mairix](<http://www.rc0.org.uk/mairix/>), which is a great application that indexes and searches mail (mbox or Maildir) in a particularly slick way. But is there a reason that indexing shouldn't be done on the fly for everything and searching better supported in the protocol?
"Virtual" search folders and flexible and arbitrary tagging
    This category encompasses what I like to think of as the "gmail functionality". [Gmail](<http://gmail.google.com/>) has been a wildly popular mail service. At first, I didn't understand why, exactly (Since when is web-based e-mail new, and since when is centralizing e-mail on one giant server and relying on that company to host my mail a good idea?). Well, I understand it has a lot to do with gmail's interface, which gives you a lot of flexibility in tagging and searching your mail. But these are trivialities. There's no reason these features could not be implemented in a modern mail server.
Compression
    This is a **huge** one. One of the biggest problems with using IMAP is that it doesn't compress anything when it sends it. Further, one of the biggest problems with Maildir mail directories is that they aren't compressed either. So we find our disk being eaten up by loads of plaintext data, and our bandwidth destroyed by uncompressed mail streams. This is silly in an age of 1+G mailboxes, and there's no excuse for it. HTTP has mod_gzip -- where is the equivalent for IMAP? And why does mail need to be stored in an uncompressed way? This sort of functionality would go hand-in-hand with the indexing.

I think one big hurdle to a lot of this (other than the herculean task of organizing standards groups to actually agree on a spec) is that it would take some deciding on whether some of these things would be the job of the IMAP server versus the MTA -- for example indexing. I suppose the real glue between the MTA and the software serving it is the format the mail is stored in (i.e. Maildir versus mbox) and perhaps that is where a lot of these improvements need to start. Once the bedrock of a better storage medium for mail is established, the protocols and software we use to store and access it can be improved around it.

So, does anyone have any other suggestions? Are there any iniatives underway? Are there any huge hurdles to this sort of thing that I am overlooking?

**UPDATE:** While I am harshing on IMAP here, as I wrote this it became obvious that a lot of these limitations really have nothing to do with IMAP but have as much to do with mail storage formats and things that would require modification/improvement everywhere, from the MTA to the client. The difficulty is extricating the different functions in a working mail system: deliver, storage, and retrieval, and trying to isolate where these improvements would have to go.
