---
layout: post
title: "Poor Business Syndrome - A primer"
date: 2005-09-27
categories: [Operations]
---
There is a real illness affecting organizations around the world and it doesn't show any signs of disappearing. Poor Business Syndrome (PBS) is a pervasive phenomenon that prevents an organization from making good business decisions in favor of saving money. Organizations suffering from PBS show early symptoms such as short-sighted leadership, a tendency to turn down solutions based on price factors only, and chronic inefficiencies. Long-term effects of PBS range from simple operational frustrations to significant revenue loss, and even death of the organization.

While the tongue in cheek explanation is a bit over the top, PBS is a real problem in today's organizations. Perhaps more than any other area, PBS rears its ugly head in technology initiatives on a daily basis. The frequency of PBS to affect technology decisions results primarily from an organization's lack of understanding due to the fast paced environment of technology. The less leadership understands about technology, the deeper PBS can affect a organization.

Technology security requirements provide the easiest illustration of how many organizations suffer from PBS. In today's interconnected computing environment, every connected device is exposed to a range of security issues from viruses to hacking exploits. As such, baseline best practices for security within a corporation should include Anti-Virus and Anti-Spam protection. 

In 2004, there were over 100 computer viruses & worms successfully released into the Internet. These malicious files use infection methods ranging from social engineering to exploiting flaws in the Windows operating system. Moreover, once a system becomes infected, the virus/worm will continue to propagate itself through a variety of fascinating techniques including scanning for email addresses on the local system to actually using Search Engines across the Internet. 

When considering the total cost of an infection (including some lesser recognized costs such as reputation damage), the decision to purchase Anti-Virus software should be an easy one. However, there are many organizations that continue to operate with low-end 'free' Anti-Virus software - and even some with no Anti-Virus protection. These organizations argue that they've never had a virus infection, so why would they need to spend money on Anti-Virus software. It's this very mentality that makes the perfect illustration of PBS. 

On a different security front, Spam has become a major headache and security risk for organizations and businesses. But for many organizations, they view Spam as only a nuisance - not the true time and resource drain it really is. As such, they rely on their PBS mentality and ignore the problem. This leaves their organization exposed and their individual employees to deal with the problems every day. The cost for Anti-Spam protection is much less than the actual cost of productivity loss from each employee dealing with Spam (even in a light case) on a daily basis.

Even extremely common technology areas such as a website are affected by PBS. Since 2000, the web is becoming the primary destination for information gathering. As such, a majority of consumers of professional services and products utilize the web as their initial point of investigation. Surveys have shown that an increasing number of professionals will not even do business with a company that doesn't have a web site. Beyond marketing, the web provides an incredible platform for adding efficiencies to any organization. Organizations can use it to more efficiently provide information to their clients and by adding rich functionality, actually revolutionize how they do business.

Despite the public's natural expectancy of an organization to have a website, many continue with their PBS mentality and avoid developing a website. Even worse, some will actually reluctantly build a website - but one that is so below standards that is actually hurts their organization. First impressions are important and their PBS not only costs them immediate business, but also damages their reputation as a professional organization.

As organizations navigate the waters of technology, they must constantly evaluate what is necessary for efficient and reliable operations. Those that suffer from Poor Business Syndrome run the risk of data loss, time/resource inefficiencies, and possible business failure. As the dynamics of doing business change, so will the 'baseline' decisions to avoid suffering from PBS. If your organization wants to insulate itself from the effects of Poor Business Syndrome, you must try to always implement industry standard best practices - even if the cost doesn't always seem justified. At minimum, forcing your organization to do the analysis and evaluate the risks will help minimize the chance of Poor Business Syndrome negatively affecting your organization - and your bottom line.
