---
layout: post
title: "SMTP HELO"
date: 2005-05-09
author: Chris
categories: [Networking]
---
A friend of mine took issue with [this post](<https://web.archive.org/web/20060510001336/http://blog.centresource.com/2005/05/02/customervendor-interaction/>) where I pointed out that sending a non-FQDN in SMTP HELO was an "egregious violation" of the RFC. She points out that the section regarding HELO in [RFC 2821](<https://web.archive.org/web/20050519081154/http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2821.html>) only specifies "SHOULD" and not "MUST" regarding a FQDN in the HELO command:

> 4.1.1.1 Extended HELLO (EHLO) or HELLO (HELO)
> 
> These commands are used to identify the SMTP client to the SMTP  
>  server. The argument field contains the fully-qualified domain name  
>  of the SMTP client if one is available. In situations in which the  
>  SMTP client system does not have a meaningful domain name (e.g., when  
>  its address is dynamically allocated and no reverse mapping record is
> 
> available), the client SHOULD send an address literal (see section  
>  4.1.3), optionally followed by information that will help to identify  
>  the client system. y The SMTP server identifies itself to the SMTP  
>  client in the connection greeting reply and in the response to this  
>  command. 

This is true, but the "SHOULD" here is in reference to the option of sending an address literal (an IPv4 address) -- **not** that it should accept anything else. The details on these restrictions, though, are spelled out elsewhere in more detail. Section 2.3.5 of the same RFC elaborates:

> 2.3.5 Domain
> 
> A domain (or domain name) consists of one or more dot-separated  
>  components. These components ("labels" in DNS terminology [22]) are  
>  restricted for SMTP purposes to consist of a sequence of letters,  
>  digits, and hyphens drawn from the ASCII character set [1]. Domain  
>  names are used as names of hosts and of other entities in the domain  
>  name hierarchy. For example, a domain may refer to an alias (label  
>  of a CNAME RR) or the label of Mail eXchanger records to be used to  
>  deliver mail instead of representing a host name. See [22] and  
>  section 5 of this specification.
> 
> The domain name, as described in this document and in [22], is the  
>  entire, fully-qualified name (often referred to as an "FQDN"). A  
>  domain name that is not in FQDN form is no more than a local alias.  
>  **Local aliases MUST NOT appear in any SMTP transaction.**

(Emphasis mine.) This lays out pretty clearly that local aliases are not acceptable, and section 5.2.5 of [RFC 1123](<https://web.archive.org/web/20050514010535/http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1123.html>) specifies this as well:

> 5.2.5 HELO Command: RFC-821 Section 3.5
> 
> The sender-SMTP MUST ensure that the  parameter in a  
>  HELO command is a valid principal host domain name for the  
>  client host. As a result, the receiver-SMTP will not have to  
>  perform MX resolution on this name in order to validate the  
>  HELO parameter.
> 
> The HELO receiver MAY verify that the HELO parameter really  
>  corresponds to the IP address of the sender. However, the  
>  receiver MUST NOT refuse to accept a message, even if the  
>  sender's HELO command fails verification.  
> 

Note that "failing verification" here is a reference to the case wherein the FQDN provided does not resolve to the IP address of the SMTP client connecting, not anything to do with sending a non-FQDN in HELO, which can and should be grounds for rejecting the message.
