---
layout: post
title: "jqUploader and small files"
date: 2008-02-01
author: Jonathan Wage
categories: [Miscellaneous]
---
Recently we had an issue with a website which had a flash upload feature using jqUploader. This feature worked flawlessly when we initially built it but when it was moved to a new server, issues started to come up. First, I discovered that trying to upload empty files results in the following error: "IO error with test.txt." So now I took it one step further and added 1 character to test.txt, now I don't get the error, but the flash never shows a progress bar, and never displays that the file was being uploaded. Although, the file was actually uploaded and sent to our php script. We then discovered this, "In some cases, progress events are not received. For example, when the file being transmitted is very small or the upload or download happens very quickly a progress event might not be dispatched." which can be found [here](<http://livedocs.adobe.com/flex/2/langref/flash/net/FileReference.html>). So, the problem is that the file is so small and the upload is happening so fast, that the events which are called for progress and completion are never even triggered. As far as I know, their is no known fix for this issue. It is just a problem with flash. The next problem was with the complete event. We eventually discovered that jqUploader requires some kind of output at the end of the upload script in order to know it is "complete". We simply added echo "success"; at the bottom and now it works. I know I didn't give many answers to the problems described above, but hopefully this will help someone else who comes across the same issue. If you have a solution please comment.
